Chapter 5
Thus, hearing the greatness of good company spoken by the son of Atri, delighted in mind, he commenced to ask again.
True is this spoken by you, O lord, as the cause of auspiciousness, this form of good company, indeed realized by direct experience.
As one obtains association, so would be the fruit of that. Women also, by association with Hemalekha, obtained great fruits.
Again, I desire to hear how Hemacuda was enlightened by her. Tell me that in detail, O ocean of compassion.
Thus questioned by Rama, Dattatreya spoke to him. Listen, O descendant of Bhrigu, I will tell the supremely purifying story.
Thus, hearing her words and knowing the objects to be tasteless, he became disinterested and disheartened.
Controlled by long-standing sensory desires, he was not able to suddenly abandon or hold them.
The prince, very ashamed, spoke nothing to his beloved. He spent some days thus, troubled in thought.
Attached to the objects, but remembering what was spoken by the woman, condemning himself, he indeed enjoyed under the control of desires.
Under the force of desires, he follows the objects, but seeing the faults in the objects, contemplating what his beloved had spoken.
His heart distressed by sorrow grieves again and again. Thus, his mind became like a swinging cradle.
Food, clothes, ornaments, women, vehicles, friends, or companions did not please him slightly, indeed.
As if having lost all wealth, he grieves continuously. Under the control of desires, he was not able to abandon all quickly.
Not able to enjoy, thus afflicted by faults, then, under the control of sorrow, seeing him pale-faced.
Hemalekha, observing him once, meeting in private, said, “Why, O lord, do you not appear as joyful as before?”
“I see you as if grieving. Why is your state thus? Perhaps your body is always afflicted by diseases?”
“In enjoyments, the wise ones say there is indeed a fear of disease, caused by the imbalance of the three doshas in the body.”
“Diseases generally pervade all bodies and are established. In every way, the imbalance caused by doshas is indeed unmanageable.”
“From food, clothes, words, sight, touch, also from time, place, and actions, the doshas obtain imbalance.”
“Therefore, its arising in the world has gone unnoticed in every way. Thus, being in imbalance, treatment is prescribed.”
Treatment is not prescribed anywhere in the absence of imbalance. Therefore, dear, tell me why indeed there is sorrow in you.
Thus hearing Hemalekha, the prince then said, “Dear, listen, I will tell you the cause of my sorrow.”
By your words, that which formerly gave me happiness is now destroyed. Indeed, I do not see anything now that increases my happiness.
The objects bestowed by the king, giving happiness all around, do not please the condemned. Therefore, my happiness is not.
Serving the objects always, like a condemned person, I ask you, dear, tell me, what should I do to attain happiness?
Thus questioned by him, Hemalekha then said, “Surely, he has rightly concluded by hearing my words.”
There is a seed for prosperity in this, because you are in this way. In those in whom such prosperity is inconceivable, they are by words also not affected.
Not indeed, even a little, are specially affected at any time, those for whom the well-worshipped deity residing in the heart is pleased.
In them, Tripura indeed would be such a state, thus considering, the very wise Hemalekha, intending to enlighten her dear,
Concealing her wisdom, she said indirectly, “Listen, prince, to this ancient event of mine.”
Formerly, my mother gave me a friend for playing. She, naturally virtuous, associated with some unvirtuous person.
She, endowed with various extraordinary creations, unnoticed by my mother, became associated with my friend.
My friend, excessively associated with bad conduct, was dearest to me, even more than life. Indeed, I was always under her control.
I cannot abandon her even for a moment, nor could she ever depart from me for even half a moment. She, by her pure nature, remained controlling me.
Constantly absorbed in her, I easily became of her nature. She was seen with the dancer of varied nature.
She was accepted in remote activity, appointed by her son. Her son was very foolish, with eyes rolling in intoxication.
He enjoyed her by force, always before me. She, with all limbs seized by him, being enjoyed daily.
She never left me, touched by him and also I didn’t leave. Then, a son was born, of the fool, of similar appearance.
He quickly became young, very fickle in nature, joined by the father’s foolishness and the grandmother’s quality.
Surrounded by the ability to create many wonders, due to the grandmother named Shunya, and the father named Mudha.
Asthira, trained and became very skilled himself, attained unimpeded and fast movement quickly.
Thus, my friend, pure-natured and virtuous by birth, attained excessive impurity by associating with the unvirtuous.
She, by her dear friend’s unvirtuous-natured son, by long association, became strongly attached to them.
My friend gradually abandoned affection for me completely. I, naturally simple, could not easily abandon that association.
Unable to abandon her due to intense devotion completely, I followed her. Then her foolish dear one, always enjoying her.
Forcibly eager to assault me completely, I, naturally pure, did not actually go under his control.
Even so, in the world, great slander about me became widespread. “She is completely enjoyed by the fool,” thus it was everywhere.
Placing her son named Asthira in me, my friend, embraced by her dear one, became completely devoted to that.
Then Asthira, well cherished and nurtured by me, grown, associated with a woman with his grandmother’s permission.
She, his dear one, named Capalā, indeed, every moment, her form different and delightful, pleasing to her dear one.
Holding the dear one, creating wonders, thus in her control, she took him, very skillful, by her expertise, indeed.
Asthira, even in a moment, goes and comes hundreds of yojanas, always, without fatigue.
Whenever Asthira desires to go anywhere, Capalā, making his desired form, also indeed
Remaining here and there, being, she pleases her dear one. Thus, Capalā, well joined with Asthira stayed
She gave birth to five sons, devoted to mother and father. They, capable, of five types, were placed in me by the friend.
I, attached to the friend, made them stronger. Then, those five sons of Capalā, grew separately.
They made a wonderful and very spacious best dwelling. Their father, under their control, was well inspired by the mother.
They bring their father to their own dwelling moment by moment. There, Asthira, residing in the eldest son’s dwelling, indeed
He heard various sounds, melodious and others also. Somewhere sweet music, somewhere very pleasant instrumental music.
He heard Rigveda hymns, Yajurveda hymns, Samaveda hymns, Atharvaveda hymns, mantras, scriptures, doctrines, histories, and the jingling of ornaments.
Hearing the song of the swarm of bees and the melodious fifth note of the cuckoo, thus he heard delightful sounds at the direction of the son.
Pleased, he went under the control of the son, and then the son directed otherwise. He heard harsh, ear-piercing, and terrifying sounds.
He heard the roaring of lions and others, the rumbling of clouds, the thunder, the breaking of the universe, miscarriage, all very terrifying.
Thus, hearing, very frightened, he also heard elsewhere likewise, weeping, lamenting, various expressions of grief and others.
Led by the second son, then Asthira went to that dwelling. There he saw seats that were soft to the touch and auspicious.
He saw beds and clothes rough to the touch, objects cool to the touch, and also objects warm to the touch.
Seeing various objects neither warm nor cool to the touch, beneficial ones made him delighted, but he was distressed by harmful ones.
Then, reaching the third son’s dwelling, Asthira saw beautiful forms and objects of various colors.
Red, white, yellow and blue, green, pink, also smoky, dark, brown, metallic, and mottled.
Thick, thin, small, long, extended, round, also semi-circular, elongated circular, beautiful, and frightening.
Repulsive, shining, fierce, obscure, and dazzling. Somewhere beneficial, and seeing other from there, the father again.
The fourth son led to his wonderful dwelling. There, he obtained flowers, fruits, and food step by step.
Drinks, licked and sucked food, juicy indeed, nectar-like, sweet, other sour tastes, and.
Pungent and bitter, astringent also, some alkaline, sweet and sour, pungent, sour, and salty.
Pungent and bitter, various flavored, different also, tasting together with the son, then the last son.
Brought the father to his own place, extremely wonderful. There he obtained many flowers and fruits.
Herbs, food, medicinal plants, and other objects from all sides, fragrant, foul-smelling, mild-smelling, and strong-smelling.
Deluding scents, knowledge-enhancing scents, fainting-inducing scents, various scents. Thus, entering and residing in the dwellings of the sons.
He delights in beneficial things somewhere, grieves in harmful things somewhere. Always engaged in coming and going, he appeared in the dwellings of the sons.
The sons, out of affection for the father, are never without the father. They don’t touch various objects or on their own at any time.
Asthira, having enjoyed many objects in the son’s house, secretly takes other objects to his own place.
Asthira, together with his wife Chapala, secretly enjoys without the sons, always excessively.
Soon, Mahasana (his new wife) became attached to her beloved husband, Asthira. Asthira also became excessively attached to her.
Then, for her pleasure, he was intent on obtaining enjoyment. She ate everything that was brought by him in a moment.
Again overwhelmed by hunger for obtaining more enjoyment, she always directs her dear one to obtain more, so he also always looks to obtain more.
Brought by the five sons, well-provided by the dear one, having eaten momentarily, again she was tormented by hunger.
To obtain enjoyment, she always directs her dear one and his sons. Then, in a short time, she gave birth to a pair of sons.
Jwalamukha, the elder of the two, and Nindya Vrtta, the other one, both were also always the most dear to their mother.
When Asthira, with great attachment, embraces her, then Jwalamukha’s flames consume his entire body.
Asthira, extremely tormented, indeed attains deep unconsciousness. Sometimes, being associated with the dear son Nindya Vrtta.
Blamed by everyone, he indeed becomes like dead. Thus, by the sorrow of the son, my friend is extremely distressed.
My dear friend, naturally pure, out of great affection for her son named Asthira, was associated with him and distressed due to sorrow.
Overwhelmed by the burden of sorrow, associated with Nindya Vrtta, and Jwalamukha, and also others, being embraced by sons.
Badly burnt, blamed by people, she indeed became almost dead. I, always following her, became almost lost, dear.
Thus, distressed by the sorrow of my friend for many years, and Asthira became not independent due to being dedicated to Mahasana
He reached the city with ten gates by some action somewhere. In that, he was associated with Mahasana, because of his sons, mother, and others.
He dwelled, desiring happiness, but experiencing sorrow day and night. Was burnt all over the body by the sons, and blamed daily.
Dragged here and there by the dear ones, always indeed. Entering and residing in the five dwellings of his sons.
Extremely fatigued, he does not obtain happiness anywhere. Thus, by the sorrow of her son, my friend is extremely distressed.
She became as if unconscious, thus dwelled in that city, associated with Jwalamukha and Nindya Vrtta, she was greatly attached.
Nourished by Shunyakya (grandmother) and the foolish father-in-law, likewise supported extremely by his wife named Chapala.
Residing in that city, she was under the control of her husband and Asthira. By the affection of my friend, I lived there, being devoted to that.
Almost destroyed by the sorrow of the friend, but intent on protecting all. If I were not there even for a moment, dear,
There would not be anyone, and by me indeed all are protected. Obtained emptiness by Shunyakya, as one obtains foolishness by the foolish.
By Asthira, instability and fickleness being associated with Chapala. By Jwalamukha, burning and Nindya Vrtta, that was his identity.
By association with the friend, thus I became of this particular form. If I were to leave the friend, that form would perish in a moment.
By association with them, they indeed call me unfaithful. All the foolish people think so, but the wise know me as pure.
My mother, the great chaste one, pure and spotless in form, even vaster than the sky, and subtler than an atom.
All-knowing, yet knowing nothing, all-doer, yet inactive, support of all, yet unsupported, foundation of all, yet unfounded.
Having all forms, yet formless, having all, yet unconnected, shining everywhere, yet not known by anyone, anywhere.
Although full of great joy, she is devoid of joy, she is without mother and father. Children like me of her are countless.
Like the countless waves of the ocean, all are group of sisters, all of them are like me in behavior, O prince, indeed.
I, having great mantra, am associated with all these groups of friends, devoted to that, I’m also like a mother in essence.
In this city, when the son of my friend becomes very tired, then Asthira sleeps completely in the lap of his mother.
But when Asthira is asleep, then his sons and others also attain sleep; no one else remains awake.
Then the dear friend named Pracara protects the city of Asthira, always moving around at the pair of eastern gates.
The mother of Asthira, who is my friend, due to her son, and her husband, she is an unchaste mother-in-law by her nature.
She, covering all of them, protects them together with her son. Thus, when all are asleep, she reaches her own mother then.
I become delighted, embraced by the mother for a long time, indeed. But again, quickly follow them when they arise daily.
This mighty friend of Asthira, named Pracara, nourishes all headed by Asthira daily.
He, becoming many from one, pervades and protects the city and its inhabitants daily, uniting all.
Without him, they indeed would be separated and lost completely, like pearls devoid of the thread strung in a garland separately.
Thus he joins and unites me greatly with all, greatly enlivened by me, indeed the thread bearer in that city.
But when that city is old, he quickly takes them to another city. Thus, relying on Pracara, he became the ruler of cities.
Indeed, unstable in many diverse ways gradually, the chaste son Asthira, though dependent, is mighty.
Influenced by me extremely in every way, he is the bearer of suffering from union with the wives Chapala and Mahashana.
Dragged everywhere by Jwalamukha and Nindya Vrtta named sons, and by other five sons.
Afflicted soul with great distress, devoid of slightest happiness, dragged here and there by his five sons.
Somewhere moved extremely by Chapala, afflicted with fatigue, somewhere runs for food due to Mahashana.
Somewhere moved by Jwalamukha, burned from feet to head, attains great fainting, and unaware of any remedy.
Obtaining with Nindya Vrtta somewhere, reproached and scolded by others, he considers himself like the dead, continuously in grief.
With a bad wife and sons, deluded, born of a bad family, always overwhelmed and being led by them.
He lived with them in various cities, high and low, indeed, sometimes in wild regions filled with carnivorous beings.
Sometimes in extremely hot places, sometimes in extremely cold, sometimes in foul-smelling places, sometimes in dense darkness.
Thus again with great sorrow, afflicted with her son, Asthira, my friend became deeply distressed, always in bad association.
Though true to nature, foolishly I followed her, dear, like a fool, extremely devoted to her family.
Who indeed can obtain even a little happiness from bad association anywhere, like a man seeking cool comfort in a summer desert?
Thus, after a long time passing, my friend, deluded with great sorrow, she associated with me in private.
Obtaining single-minded association with me, having met a good husband, conquering her son, killing, and binding his sons and others.
Associating with me, she quickly reached my mother’s city, embracing my mother repeatedly, who is pure.
Immersed in the ocean of bliss, she became that instantly. Thus, you also, controlling bad conduct arising from the friend.
Obtaining your mother, lord, always obtain happiness. This is told to you, lord, as a self-experienced source of happiness.

Thus ends the fifth chapter on the Story of Bondage in the Tale of Hemachuda in the Knowledge Section of the revered Tripura Rahasya.
