Chapter 15
Thus, having heard the very wonderful story of the mountain world, Rama, the best of the Bhrigu lineage, was again extremely astonished.

Reflecting on what was said by the guru, with pure intellect, ascertaining, he again went to Dattatreya, bowed, and respectfully asked.

O Lord, what you said through various stories, I have thoroughly considered and known this much essence.

Consciousness is the one truth, and the object of consciousness is imagined there, like a city in a mirror, indeed considered false.

She, consciousness, is the supreme power, in the form of knowledge, the great goddess, who projects the picture of the world on her own self as the background, differentiated from the unmanifest, etc.

Manifests due to mere independence, without any cause. This much I have known, considering with subtle intellect.

But such consciousness, described as barren of the object of knowledge, is indeed impossible to attain, as the object of knowledge is always present.

Without the object of knowledge, how can there be perception of consciousness? Without perception, there is no purpose for it.

Purpose, even liberation, how would it be? Of what kind is it said? With knowledge being, liberation would be, but in liberation, how is activity?

Knowers are seen devoted to activity. How indeed is their object of consciousness said to be established in consciousness?

Being established in pure consciousness, how can there be activity? Knowledge being of one form, liberation would indeed be one result.

How is the difference in state of the knowers seen in the world? Some perform actions as per the true scriptures in time.

Some worship deities by different paths, while some are devoted to meditation with controlled senses.

Some perform austerities drying up the body and senses, while some enlighten disciples by separate discourses clearly.

Some govern kingdoms by the path of the law of punishment, while some debate in assemblies with opponents.

Some constantly compose various scriptures, while others merely always bring foolishness.

Some are always engaged in livelihoods condemned by the world, yet these knowers are thus famous and much criticized.

How is there a difference in state despite the absence of difference in practice and result? Are these knowers of equal knowledge, or have they resorted to difference?

You are able to explain all this to me completely. I, your disciple, have no other refuge, and your mind is naturally compassionate.

Thus, Atri's son (Dattatreya), asked by Bhargava with a clear mind, considering the series of questions appropriate, began to explain.

O Rāma, best among the wise, you certainly will reach that state, being devoted to good reflection, therefore you are endowed to know.

This indeed is that grace, which is good reflection; without divine grace, who attains auspiciousness?

Know this much as the duty of one's own deity; good reflection always increases when well pleased.

What you have known is indeed true; it is not otherwise. But even that which is spoken by you, the transcendental consciousness body.

What you have spoken is not well known by you, O Rāma. But as long as one knows with detachment (from experience), indeed, he does not know.

Because when that is properly known, it dispels detachment. But detached knowledge is like dream knowledge.

As dream treasure attainment is useless for people, thus detached knowledge would give non-primary results.

Here I will tell you a very wonderful ancient event. Formerly, in Videha, there was a very righteous king.

Janaka, the wise elder, well versed in higher and lower knowledge, once worshipped his own deity with supreme rituals.

There came Brāhmaṇas and others, learned ascetics, skilled in arts, Vedic scholars, ritualists, and possessors of sacrifices.

At that time, sacrifice to Varuṇa started, and many invited Brāhmaṇas and others did not go there.

Indeed, pleased by Janaka, honored and satisfied by him, then came Varuṇa's son with Buddhist wealth.

In the guise of a Brāhmaṇa, to lead Brāhmaṇas by deceit, reaching the sacrificial hall, uniting the king with blessings.

He reproached the members there, while the assembly members listened. 'O King, your sacrificial hall does not shine greatly.'

Like a lotus pond filled with crows and cranes, the assembly shines greatly with learned gatherings.

As an autumnal lake with flocks of swans and lotuses, here I do not see even one clear knowledge sufficiently.

"May it be well with you; I will go. My stay here will not be. How can I enter this assembly filled with fools?"

Thus addressed by Varuṇa's son, the members immediately became angry. 'Why, O relative of Brāhmaṇas, do you insult everyone?'

What is this knowledge of yours by which you have conquered all of us? Uselessly you boast, O foolish one; having conquered us, you will go.

Mostly, scholars situated in the earthly realm have indeed assembled. Why, O evil-minded one, do you wish to conquer only the earthly realm today?

Tell, what is your knowledge by which you desire to conquer us?" Thus, when the members said this, Varuṇa's son again said to them.

By agreement, I will conquer all of you in a moment. If I am conquered by you, I shall be submerged in the ocean.

"I will submerge you if conquered, or be submerged if I conquer. Approaching thus, let us argue by this agreement."

Thus said, the members agreed to argue with him. The Brāhmaṇas intensely argued with Varuṇa's son.

Varuṇa's son conquered the Brāhmaṇas by deceitful arguments, submerging hundreds and thousands of Brāhmaṇas in the ocean.

The Brāhmaṇas who were submerged were taken by Varuṇa's messengers. Approaching Varuṇa's sacrifice, they rejoiced, greatly honored.

Hearing that his father Kahola was submerged, then his son Aṣṭāvakra, skilled in disputation and knowledge, arrived.

Conquering Varuṇa's son, he commanded him to be submerged in the ocean. Then Varuṇa's son clearly summoned the foremost Brāhmaṇas.

He brought them from his own world, having been conquered by Aṣṭāvakra. Then, when the Brāhmaṇas arrived, Kahola's son greatly.

Freed all the Brāhmaṇas, he was surpassed with pride. Defeated by Aṣṭāvakra, the Brāhmaṇas came in sorrow.

At that time, they took refuge in an ascetic woman who arrived. Consoling them, the Brāhmaṇas, she, wearing ochre robes.

With matted hair, ever young, possessing a beautiful form, approaching the assembly, she spoke, highly honored by the king.

"Son of Kahola, dear, you are greatly wise. The Brāhmaṇas were freed by you, having conquered Varuṇa's son in argument."

"I ask you something, tell without deceit, which position, when known, leads to immortality for all."

In which position, when known, all doubts dissolve, nothing remains unknown, and nothing is desirable.

"If you know the unknown, tell me immediately." Thus asked by the ascetic woman, Kahola's son said.

"I know that position, listen again, O ascetic woman. Indeed, there is nothing unknown to me in this world of any measure."

"I have thoroughly studied all the scriptures repeatedly. What you ask, I will tell, listen truly, O ascetic woman."

"Indeed, that is the cause of all worlds, devoid of beginning, middle, and end, unbounded by space and time, pure, indivisible consciousness."

"Indeed, that which supports all this world, shines like a city in a mirror; that is the supreme position."

"Knowing that, one attains the state of steady immortality, like a mirror when known, there would be no doubt anywhere."

"In the infinite reflections, nothing would be unknown, nor anything undesirable, thus when the supreme is known."

"And that too is unknown to others due to the absence of the means of knowledge; thus, O ascetic woman, that essence is perceived by the view of scriptures."

"Thus, hearing the words of Aṣṭāvakra, she said again, 'O sage's boy, your words are rightly said as agreed upon by all.'"

"What you said is unknown due to the absence of the means of knowledge, thus, knowing that indeed attains the immortal and unchanging state."

"If you think the previous and latter words are consistent, how can I not know the unknown and say it that state exists? Explain."

"If you know it is (that state), do not say it is unknown. Then, this indeed, O learned one, is perceived by the view of scriptures by you."

"You do not know that yourself, therefore it is not directly perceived; seeing all reflections directly as they are."

"You do not know the mirror directly, thus how do you say that? Thus speaking in the assembly, in front of Janaka indeed."

"You do not think you are humiliated, how do you say that? Thus told by her, he did not speak anything there."

"He became despondent as if, instantly ashamed, head down, standing for a moment, considering within, said by her."

"The best of the twice-born, not finding the answer to that question, said to her, 'O ascetic woman, I do not know the answer to your question.'"

"I am your disciple, tell me how this is explained. I do not say anything false, which is a destroyer of penance and useless."

"Thus asked, the ascetic woman, truly pleased with him, replied to Aṣṭāvakra and the listening  assembly."

"Dear, not knowing this, many have come to delusion; by dry logic, it is unknowable and well hidden everywhere."

"In such assemblies, no one knows; this king knows, or I know, indeed no one else."

"Everywhere in disputes, this question-answer leads nowhere; mostly, the learned try to know, relying only on logic."

"This is not well known by logic, even by subtle intellect anywhere; without serving the true guru and by the grace of the deities."

"O sage's son, I will say this, listen with a subtle mind; even after hearing this, it is not knowable indifferently by breathing mind."

"As long as this knowledge is not realized in the self, so much spoken and heard, even thousands of times, is useless."

"As someone with a pearl necklace on his own neck, carelessly not realizing, thinks it has been taken by thieves, in a deluded state."

"Even after being awakened and told by someone that it is on the neck, as long as he does not realize himself and see his neck."

"Until then, he does not obtain the necklace on the neck, even with subtle investigation. Thus, O sage's son, realize the self and its own nature."

"Even if very skilled, until one realizes the inner self, how can one know it from outside?"

"As a lamp illuminates objects everywhere, but does not illuminate itself anywhere."

"Thus, the sun and others illuminate themselves without depending on another illuminator, all are situated as illuminators."

"And thus, what about lamps, due to non-illumination, do not exist or illuminate, it is appropriate to say."

"Thus, with illuminating objects existing in lamps, absolutely non-illuminating, how do you say that is the nature of consciousness?"

"If it illuminates without being perceivable, that is doubtful; therefore, you consider all this properly with an inward-facing vision."

"This supreme consciousness power, Tripura, all-encompassing, all-illuminating, where and when does it not shine?"

"When it does not shine, then what indeed? By non-illumination also, the consciousness power shines."

"How does non-illumination appear? How does it not shine, tell me. If it shines, how does it shine? Consider this with subtlety."

"Here, all, even skillful scholars do not see. Without inner vision, deluded by this, they wander."

"As long as vision does not remain by renouncing activity, so long, inner vision does not exist in any way."

"As long as one does not attain inner vision, so long, one does not see it. Inner vision should be desireless, how can that be with effort?"

"Abandoning that properly, resort to your own nature. For a moment, relying on your own essence, without deliberation, then beyond."

"Considering through memory, then you know everything, unknowable and well-known, that is said to be the truth."

"Knowing thus the unknowable, one may attain the immortal state. This is all spoken to you, O sage's son, salutations be to you."

"I go, as this is not known by you through once hearing. This king, the best among the wise, will enlighten you."

"Ask again your doubts, the king will clear them all. Having said this, she was honored by the king and bowed by the assembly."

Like a cloud streak driven by the wind, it disappeared in a moment. This is explained to you, O Rama, the process of perception of the self.

Thus ends the fifteenth chapter named "Ashtavakra" in the revered Knowledge Section of Tripura Rahasya.
