Chapter 16
Having heard this, Rama, the son of Bhargava, experienced wonder within and asked Atri's son again, unsatisfied by hearing the story.

O Lord, this ancient event heard is indeed wonderful. The great sage Ashtavakra again asked the king.

What the king replied to him, tell that to me completely. Oh, this wonderful story I have never heard.

O Guru, with compassion, tell me all about knowledge and action. Thus asked, the great sage Dattatreya then… 

Narrated to Bhargava a supremely purifying story. Listen, O Bhargava, to what was spoken by the great soul Janaka.

When the ascetic woman had departed, Ashtavakra, the sage's son, surrounded by many sages, met the foremost of kings.

He asked what the ascetic woman briefly spoke, which was significant. That being said by me, listen properly and attentively.

O King, lord of Videha, what the ascetic woman said, I did not know properly due to the brevity of the statement.

How is that knowledge unknowable? Explain, O ocean of compassion. Thus asked, Janaka spoke to him, as if in wonder.

O sage's son, listen to the words spoken by me now. That is not unknowable in every way, indeed also not knowable in every way.

If it is unknowable in every way, what would the guru say? The guru should impart the truth, therefore, one should first seek refuge in the guru.

This knowledge is extremely easy and also difficult indeed. For one whose vision is turned inward, that would be easy.

For one whose vision is outward, that is extremely difficult indeed. Only indescribable, that is unknowable in every way.

Somehow, in a different form, it can be described and knowable. Whatever visible you see here, by that it is said to be knowable.

Whatever appears to you, contemplate that with a pure mind. The power of illumination, without the illuminated, is the source of all illumination.

Consider that reality, thus understand, O sage's son. The knowable is not knowledge itself, which does not illuminate.

Knowledge is other by which the knowable is known, not by itself anywhere. The knowable in different forms is known indeed by knowledge.

By different forms, knowledge does not differentiate anywhere. The difference is indeed the property of the knowable, not of knowledge anywhere.

The difference in form indeed appears in the knowable side. See the knowable separately by intellect without form.

As the mirror's reflection, likewise this consciousness assumes multiple forms of the visible form.

Thus, this knowledge is knowable in a form distinct from the knowable. But by nature, that knowledge is not knowable and is all-pervading.

Because this form of the knower is not known, therefore contemplate, O Aṣṭāvakra, on your own form, which is such and clear.

You are not the body, life-force, or mind due to their instability. The body is a collection of elements, how can that be your form?

And that transcends the perception of other objects, thus the life-force and mind also would transcend the ego-mind.

This supreme consciousness remains without transcending the ego-mind, therefore, you, O Aṣṭāvakra, are the knower of all in essence.

See with the turned inward vision your own pure consciousness. Those with the highest intellect see their own self indeed at the instruction time.

Your vision is not this eyeball, but the mind's eye is said. By which you see in dreams, that vision is called the primary one.

Its turning inward is also said, listen, O learned one. The unturned inward vision indeed does not see anything.

Desiring to see something with vision entirely from others, if one would firmly connect by turning inward in that indeed.

Then that shines clearly, but not otherwise at any time. Otherwise, the outward-oriented vision does not shine clearly at any time.

Indeed, as though not shining, would be with unturned inward vision. Thus, understand the state of hearing, skin, etc., O learned one.

Thus indeed, with the mind, the perception of happiness and sorrow would be. With the unturned inward mind, one is not able to know anything.

Therefore, that singular focus and turning inward of the vision, the turned inward mind, is pure, reflecting its own form.

Here I will explain to you, listen, that specific distinction. If that self is beyond the senses, it is also within the senses with the mind.

Here many are confused, those who distinguish Vedic scriptures. The mind's scope is externally situated in two ways.

The first turning inward from others is superior, focused on that. But even the mere turning inward from others of the mind is being.

Not shining anything, the object at the edge opportunities, therefore, the focus on that is here also a superior mental activity.

Thus, the turned inward of them, the two activities shining, because the unturned inward consciousness, therefore, here it would not be thus.

But from others, the mere turning inward would shine, as in the mirror in front for seeing something.

But from others, the turning inward and facing of that is expected, like desiring to see the reflection in the mirror.

When one desires to see the sky in the mirror, then by mere turning inward from other things, the accomplishment is achieved.

The sky, pervading everywhere, is always situated in the mirror. But if unturned and covered by other things, it does not shine.

Supporting and pervading all, even when covered by them, therefore, by mere turning inward from them, it indeed shines.

Thus, consciousness, pervading and supporting all, is situated at all times, fully complete in the mind, like space, O twice-born.

Therefore, mere turning inward from others of the mind is desired. See, O wise one, where and when consciousness is not shining.

When and where it is not, nor when and where it is, therefore, in the shining of the self-consciousness, by the mind's turning inward from others.

It is not merely dependent on some, nor is it entirely new at times. Indeed, due to the absence of dependence, it is said to be unknowable.

Therefore indeed, pure mind perceived is said to be that reality. But from others, indeed, turning inward is mental purity.

This indeed is said to be the supreme means in the knowledge of reality. As long as the mind is not pure, then how would knowledge be?

When the mind is pure, how would knowledge surely not be? All the means here are for its purification.

Action, worship, even dispassion, are engaged indeed for the purification of the mind, and not otherwise.

Therefore, with a pure mind, that supreme form shines. Thus, hearing what was said by the king, Aṣṭāvakra again spoke.

O king, you said, turning inward from others is indeed mental. If that alone is supreme, consciousness shines with the mind.

If that turned inward mind would shine in deep sleep, then what is the use of other means? Is accomplishment done from mere sleep?

Thus addressed by the sage, the king then said, "Hear, O sage, composed, I speak the resolution to you."

Truly, in deep sleep, the mind's turning inward is complete. It is a dissolved mind, and you also, now how would it shine?

When the mirror is covered with ink, the sky does not shine in the mirror. But sometimes, by mere turning inward from others, it shines.

Thus, when the mind is covered by sleep, turned inward from others, due to unsuitability, the mind does not shine consciousness anywhere.

In other times, why wouldn't it shine even on clod, wall, etc.? Therefore, it indeed shines with a suitable, pure mind.

Therefore, it is similar to as nothing shines for a newborn child. Even then, listen, I will explain, what happens when the mirror is covered with ink.

Even when it is covered with ink, the reflection exists unseen, indeed. Due to blending, it is not distinguished from its nature, due to non-removal of ink.

Similarly, the mind situated in deep sleep is blended by sleep. Therefore, due to the absence of turning away from others, blended with sleep, it does not shine.

Therefore, note that the memory of sleep occurs even for one who has arisen. Observe the confusion experienced in that state.

I will explain that to you correctly. Listen properly, composed. The mind has two states, distinguished by illumination and reflection.

The rest in external objects is called illumination. The reflection on that in oneself is indeed mentioned as reflection.

Illumination would be non-conceptual due to non-distinction of objects. Reflection is conceptual due to word distinction and distinction.

This kind, thus devoid of word distinction, of the form of object perception, that illumination is non-conceptual.

This kind, thus based on object perception, of the form distinguished by words, that reflection's self-illumination.

Internal, new, or another, is mentioned as reflection. Therein, the new appearance is said to be experiential.

Another is of the nature of memory and investigation, arising from impressions. Thus, the mind, endowed with two kinds of power, is always situated.

That deep sleep, of the form of sleep and illumination, long-standing, full of waking reflection, is called the non-deluded state.

Because deep sleep is dense with illumination and of the nature of confusion, therefore, indeed, it is like a lamp due to the density of illumination.

Determined as confusion by all, even by the wise in every way, sleep is called the first-born, unmanifest, great void here.

There is no common state of deep sleep. Its illumination, during object perception, even in waking, the mind is of this kind.

But hidden by the flood of concepts arising  in the next moment, in deep sleep, due to the density of illumination of unmanifest power.

Thus, the discerning ones discern the mind as dissolved. During object perception, even thus, the mind becomes dissolved.

Listen, O sage, I will explain to you the secret from my own experience, where even the wise and highly subtle discerners get confused.

Non-conceptual absorption, deep sleep, and object perception, this trio is of one kind due to the density of illumination.

Due to the difference in reflection, distinction is observed by practitioners. The cause there is determined to be the difference in objects.

In absorption, pure consciousness; in sleep, unmanifest; and in perception, differentiated appearance. Thus, the object is situated in a threefold manner.

Despite differences in the objects, the illumination is only non-conceptual. Therefore, it is called dense illumination.

Absorption and deep sleep, due to their long duration, are subsequently clearly discerned by all.

Due to momentariness, perception is not clearly discerned. Thus, absorption and sleep, being momentary, are not discerned.

Deep sleep is momentary; likewise, absorption also exists. Deep sleep is observed by those with subtle vision, due to familiarity, indeed.

Absorption, indeed, due to unfamiliarity, is not discerned as subtle by all beings, O sage, even in states of activity.

Subtle absorptions are present but do not appear due to lack of cultivation. In waking, the non-reflection which is, is stated as absorption.

The mere absence of reflection is called absorption. Thus, the state of absorption is situated in deep sleep and in perception.

But primary absorption is not found in these two. Due to being imbued with impressions of absence of distinction, there is no primacy.

Perception in waking becomes of the nature of non-reflection. Yet, I will explain to you, O sage's son, with respect. Listen.

The unmanifest, which is first-born, is not common. Indeed, its perception as "it does not exist" is of the nature of absolute non-existence.

This deep sleep is thus said to be the inert power of consciousness. In perception, appearing, it does not reach the state of appearance.

Therefore, deep sleep is indeed associated with inert perception. In absorption, the consciousness that appears is of the nature of Brahman.

Devouring time and space, destroyer of the appearance of non-existence, completely made of existence, how can that goddess be deep sleep?

Therefore, mere deep sleep does not become fulfillment. Janaka thus enlightened Aṣṭāvakra with these words.

Thus ends the sixteenth chapter named "Ashtavakra" in the revered Knowledge Section of Tripura Rahasya.
