Chapter 14
Hearing the sage's words and considering with an auspicious intellect, he quickly abandoned sorrow, knowing the world's state to be like a dream.

Taking hold of courage and free from sorrow, he again asked the sage's son: "O son of the sage, of great intelligence, seer of the past and future."

"I think there is nothing unknown to you, even slightly. I ask you, kindly tell me what I inquire about."

"You say all this arises from thought. How then does what I further contemplate not become external in any way?"

"You created the world in the mountain perfected by thought, but also how can place and time be diverse simultaneously?"

"Which of the two there is untrue? Reveal that to me. Thus asked, the sage's son began to explain."

"Intention and thought are said to be twofold: accomplished or unaccomplished. Accomplishment is the absence of alternatives, but unaccomplishment is due to fixed purpose on an alternative."

"See this world, born by thought of Brahman. Indeed, this is thought by all as real, firmly."

"Similarly, in one's own intention, there is no thought by anyone. This division of alternatives leads to unaccomplishment; therefore, it is diverse thought."

"The accomplishment of thought is established here in many ways: by birth, by gem, similarly by herb, and by yoga."

"By austerity, by mantra accomplishment, and by boon, O king, it is indeed by birth in Brahmanas, by gem in Yakshas and Rakshasas."

"But by herb, in gods, by yoga, of yogis, it is by austerity of ascetics, and by mantra of those with mantras."

"Of Vishvakarma and others, by boon attainment, it indeed became intended, similarly to be thought accomplished, by forgetting the past."

"Then the thought becomes stable, indeed until the previous is not remembered. Thus, indeed, non-dual thought if stable."

"Without desire, until it is not divided by alternatives, then that thought, indeed is accomplished, and achieves a great result."

"From division, due to alternatives, your thought is not accomplished. Accomplish the thought quickly if you desire to create."

"Listen, O king, to my speaking of the duality of place and time. You see, you are unaffected by the world's transactions, therefore…"

"This picture of the world appears indeed. Listen properly as I speak to you. This nature of the world's being which appears by diversity."

"Indeed, the light of the sun exists as twofold: to the day-blind, it is darkness; but to others, it is illuminating."

"Water obstructs the breath of humans and animals, but for fish and others, there is no breath obstruction in water."

"Fire burns mortals and others, but the water-bird devours that. Fire is extinguished by water, yet it sometimes burns in water."

"Thus, all entities in the world exist in dual forms. Similarly, some have sensory functions, while others are without senses."

"Indeed, by nature, there are hundreds and thousands of contradictions. Here, I will explain this with an attentive mind, listen."

"These objects, indeed, are mere modifications of the eye. There is nothing else visible anywhere outside of the eye."

"As one with jaundiced eyes sees everything as yellow, and another with cataract sees one thing as two."

"Thus, those with different defective eyes see the world in various ways. There is a place named Karandaka in the middle of the eastern sea."

"There, on the island, people always see objects as red. Similarly, people always see things in the island of Ramanaka."

"The entire realm of objects is reversed from top to bottom. Thus, in other islands, the realm of objects is various."

"People always see according to the nature of their eyes. There, if anything is seen otherwise, somewhere."

"By effective medicine, the eyes see as before. Thus, whatever is seen on the surface of the earth is seen by the eye."

"As long as the part of the eye is like yellow, due to jaundiced eyes, similarly the parts of the sense organs like smell and others are too, certainly."

"Mental and mere mind is, thus indeed the entire world. The order we see also arises from the nature of the senses, from that, nothing is outside."

"Listen, O king, that which appears merely outside in the world, that original nature of all worlds, is like the canvas of the world picture."

"Certainly, the support of that external, to be stated, is indeed the body. It is the support; otherwise, this world is not capable."

"What indeed is the support of that appearance outside? When stated as the mountain is outside, the mountain is not actually outside."

"As the pot appears outside, so likewise the body. It is not possible to state as outside from the perspective of the illuminator."

"The illumination of the lamp and sun's light from outside is not justified. Therefore, the internal illumination of the illuminator is thus only justified."

"The illuminator is not the body and others, as they are being illuminated like the mountain and others. The illuminator is not in any way the illuminated, indeed that is justified."

"If the illuminator is also being illuminated, there is instability of the illuminator. Indeed, oneself being the illuminator and being illuminated is not justified."

"Therefore, the illuminator is pure, having the sole nature of the illuminator. That, indeed, is the essence of light here, complete and of a single essence."

"By that, space and time are pervaded, due to its illumination. Its completeness is the essence of light, as the non-essence is absent anywhere."

"Whether inside or outside, whatever is situated within the essence of light, therefore, that would not be the support, just as the mountain is not the peak."

"In this way, the essence of light, engulfing all phenomena, shines independently in itself, everywhere and always."

"This supreme consciousness is called Tripura, the supreme goddess. The knowers of the Vedas call it Brahman, and the best of the Vaishnavas call it Vishnu."

"The best of the Shaivas call it Shiva, and those devoted to Shakti call it Shakti. Anything said apart from this form is insignificant."

"Indeed, pervaded by the power of consciousness, like the reflection in a mirror, its illumination is caused by the illuminated and the illuminated does not exist by itself."

"Indeed, the illuminated is submerged in light, like a city in a mirror. As the city in the mirror does not differ from the mirror."

"Likewise, the world shines in consciousness and does not differ from it, just as the complete, compact, single-form mirror self."

"As a separate city in a mirror in every way does not make sense, likewise, is the complete, compact, single-form conscious self."

"The world does not attain coherence of self in every way, but self like space, due to its nature of emptiness, does."

"The world always tolerates duality everywhere, but how can the existing consciousness, of non-empty nature and single essence, do so?"

"A second part, i.e., the world could be tolerated directly, like the nature of a mirror. Therefore, consciousness, like a mirror, possible due to the grandeur of independence."

"It would illuminate all moving and non-moving forms in the secondless, in its own form, devoid of cause and effect, highly vivid."

"As manifold forms shine in a mirror, even then, oneness shines clearly, without distinction, untainted."

"Likewise, in the varied world, even as manifold forms shine, one perfected by investigation remains, devoid of faults."

"O king, behold in your self the state of the kingdom of mind, manifold varied forms, even pure consciousness."

"In creation or in dissolution, that consciousness is like the undifferentiated, in presence or absence of the reflection, like a mirror."

"Even in this single form, consciousness, due to the cause of independence, illuminates within, like the sky in a mirror."

"This first establishment is called ignorance, darkness, due to this, it appears as if it is a part of the complete, as if illumination is called the external appearance."

"From the division of the complete I-feeling, this form of the I-feeling is indeed called the unmanifest, and is described as the inert power (causing ignorance)."

"Which consciousness, here manifesting externally in a fragmented manner, is said to be the Shiva principle. That power is its illumination."

"The external form is imagined as the great void, indeed, filled by the covering of the I-feeling, is remembered as always filled with Shiva."

"That indeed, in the primary state of inertia, is considered as called Ishvara. But the consciousness of these two (Jiva & Ishvara) is the examination of distinction and non-distinction."

"Thus, this much is called pure knowledge, said to be pure, due to the power of distinction not fully grown and due to the illumination of the non-distinct self."

"Then, due to the fullness of consciousness's independence, in the fully grown feeling of distinction, the inert power attained the state of possessing attributes, and consciousness attained the state of being the essence of attributes."

"Then, that inert power is considered the principle of illusion, but the intellect of distinction is due to the abundance of the feeling of distinction."

"Enveloped by the abundance of distinction, consciousness, contracted in nature, enveloped by the five sheaths, attains the state of the individual soul."

"The five sheaths are the power of action, power of knowledge, attachment, time, and destiny. The power of action results in limited doership, and the power of knowledge results in limited knowledge."

"Attachment is called thirst, limitation is due to lifespan, and time is called destiny. Endowed with  these, the individual soul becomes subservient."

"Presiding over by the power of consciousness, various beginningless actions of people, the aggregate of tendencies, established, is called nature."

"The result of actions is threefold because she (nature) has three forms. The difference in states is indeed called the mind."

"In deep sleep, one’s nature should be known. After that, it is called the mind. Consciousness with the aggregate of tendencies is said to be the mind."

"This unmanifest is indeed said to be due to the state of the aggregate of tendencies. By the distinction of individuals, the mind becomes various."

"Without distinction, that one state of beings in deep sleep indeed attains true nature. After that, it goes into the state of mind."

"This person is indeed said to be due to the predominance of consciousness. But due to the predominance of the unmanifest, it goes into the state of mind and nature."

"Due to the distinction of actions, that inner instrument is called threefold: ego, intellect, and mind, O best of kings."

"Of the knowledge and action senses, fivefold they would become. From that, separately, the elements are sound, sky, etc., both gross and subtle are born."

"Thus, the supreme consciousness, with the external appearance as a precursor, performs play in the order of creation, etc., witnessing all."

"There, influenced by the primordial power of Tripura in creation, Hiraṇyagarbha, who is Brahmā, arises from this contemplation."

"There, but the consciousness which manifests as 'you' and 'I', she is indeed the supreme power of consciousness. There is no distinction of that."

"The distinction appears due to limitations, indeed contemplated in Brahman. In the cessation of that contemplation, the appearance of distinction does not exist."

"The power of contemplation of consciousness, covered by illusion, but in the removal of that covering, you will attain success."

"Place, time, or something, are defined as contemplated by whom, thus it would appear there due to the difference in extent and subtlety."

"Contemplated by me as one day, that one day is indeed here, in the form of twelve billion years by Brahma."

"Thus contemplated by him, this appearance of difference of long and short duration, in the created mountain by Brahma, measured by a span and a gavyūti."

"But by me, due to contemplation of the infinite region in the mountain, thus both are here, true and false indeed."

"You also, within, contemplating a place measured by a krosha, and time formed of moments, can further contemplate there indeed, infinite yojanas."

"Innumerable time also appears as long as contemplation does. Therefore, this external world is the form of mere contemplation."

"In the form of consciousness, the unmanifest appears, O lord of men. Therefore, the world, full of images, is on the unmanifest background of the external self."

"She would be the mere unmanifest background, with her own consciousness as the background. Therefore, even a distant place is attainable for a yogi or a long time also."

"In a moment, they see it like a fruit in the palm, certainly. Therefore, whether far or near, long time or quickly."

"Perfected by mere contemplation, based on the mirror of consciousness, having ascertained thus, abandon delusion by the method of pure consciousness contemplation."

"Then you, like me, will become independent. Thus, having heard the words of the sage's son, the best of sages."

"Then he, having abandoned all delusion, the knower of the knowable, of auspicious disposition, by the practice of meditation, having perfected one's own contemplation."

"Having attained independence, then for a long time having enjoyed, but then uprooting the appearance of the body, taking refuge in the great sky."

"Mahāsena also attained supreme liberation, O descendant of Bhrigu. Thus, the world is true due to the cause of mere contemplation of existence."

"Consider this, O best of Bhrigus, the world shines in the form of the true self. By reflection, your delusion, resting in the mind, would attain peace."

Thus ends the fourteenth chapter named "The Story of Shailaloka" in the revered Knowledge Section of Tripura Rahasya.
