Chapter 9
Having heard his beloved's words, Hemachuda was very astonished and, with a voice choked with joy, began to speak again.

Oh dear, you are blessed and skillful. What can I describe of your splendor of knowledge, which has been spoken in the form of a complete story?

Such a story of my nature was not known to me anywhere. By your words, I now see it as clearly as a fruit in hand.

I remember and experience it within, oh, the wonderful actions of the world. Who is that supreme consciousness, the mother, and how is our birth from her?

Who are we, and what is our nature? Tell me that. Thus asked, Hemalekha, Ram said to the beloved.

Listen, lord, I will explain this hidden meaning with respect. Contemplate the form of the self with an extremely pure intellect.

Not visible nor speakable, therefore I will say how. Knowing your own self-form, indeed, then you will know the mother.

Indeed, there is no command in one’s true form, therefore it is without a commander, see your own form with your self and pure intellect.

Shining from gods to lower beings, illuminated by rays, shining everywhere, of everything, always without mind.

How, where, when, by whom can it be described even partially? Show my eyes, thus it is said, beloved, now.

Here, a teacher is of no use as in seeing eyes. Even a skilled great teacher, how can he show the eyes?

Therefore, the teacher is a means here in showing that. I will tell you that means; listen with a restrained mind.

As long as you see "mine" in the self, then beyond that, your own form, which is not "mine," does not shine to you.

Going to solitude, discerning this, whatever shines as mine, abandoning that, beyond that, observe the self.

As I shine to you as mine, not because of self-ness in me. But, by mere relation, my own thinking, not in essence, indeed, I am.

Abandoning all for my sake, which indeed cannot be abandoned, realizing that self, attain supreme welfare.

Thus spoken by his beloved, Hemachuda, standing quickly, went, mounting a horse, out from the city at that moment.

Entering a garden like Nandan for a moment, he entered a tall crystal mansion at the forest's end.

Dismissing all attendants and ordering the gatekeepers, no one should enter here during my solitary contemplation.

The king's ministers, teachers, or the king himself, even if assembled here, are not allowed to enter until I give you the order.

Thus, having spoken, he ascended the mansion and entered the ninth floor. There, at a beautiful window viewing all worlds.

He sat on a soft cushioned seat, free from others, and then, concentrating his mind firmly, he engaged in contemplation.

Surely, how are all these people thus deluded? Not even one here knows their own self even slightly, indeed.

All people perform various activities for their own self. Some read scriptures and Vedic texts daily.

Some earn wealth, some rule the earth. Others fight with enemies, and some indulge solely in enjoyments.

They do this for self-interest, but which of these is the self? No one here knows this; whence, thus, this delusion?

Alas, truly without knowing the self, indeed, all this was done. Like actions done in vain in a dream, now I contemplate that.

House and grain, kingdom and wealth, women and cattle, something else, are not my essence, but due to the absence of "I-ness".

For my sake, due to being, I should indeed be the body in every way. Surely, I am a Kshatriya heir with a fair body, no doubt.

With "I-ness" overcome, thus, these people also, others, thus determining, the prince contemplated that body.

Then he began to negate the selfhood of the body. Alas, how is this body the refuge of possessiveness?

The aggregate of blood, bones, etc., constantly changing, may surely be just my form. This severed, indeed, is observed.

Like wood or clay, otherwise established in dreams, I am not the body; I may indeed be another. This life-breath is also likewise.

Mind and intellect, I may not be, since these are mine. Thus, from body to intellect, indeed another I am, no doubt.

I am never not there, due to the absence of appearance. Always, I am indeed established as appearing, no doubt.

Clearly, what is the awareness of my appearing? I do not know that; why is this not known by me?

The pot and so on appear by the eyes and so on, not otherwise on earth. This life-breath shines by touch; the mind is perceived by knowledge.

Thus, by what is my awareness of the intellect not known, indeed, this? Thus, if the self does not shine from where is their awareness known to me?

Then, I will not contemplate these (mind & intellect); then my awareness will arise. Thus determining, by mind, he abandoned the mental sphere.

Then he saw dense darkness for a moment. This is the form of my self, thus determining, in his mind.

He obtained incomparable joy and then thought again, "Surely, I will see again." Thus, he restrained his mind.

By forceful practice, he restrained the restless mind and saw clearly a mass of light, without beginning or end, shining for a moment.

Awakened, he thought, "What is this?" Amazed, he said, "Oh, I see various forms. What is this self, and how is this?"

Then, he restrained his mind again, saying, "I will see again." His mind, absorbed in sleep, appeared firm for a long time.

There, he saw a network of dreams, various strange visions. Then, greatly awakened, he attained deep thought.

What dreams did I see covered by sleep? Oh, I saw darkness and light; the self may be of dream nature.

The dream is indeed a mental delight; how can I abandon this? So, firmly determining, I will restrain and see again.

He restrained his mind forcefully, and it became steady. Then, he became as if immersed in the ocean of bliss within.

By the movement of the mind again, he immediately awakened. What was this? Was it my dream or mental confusion?

Or, is this indeed the truth, it appears inconceivable to me. I did not experience any bliss like this; how did I obtain it?

Oh, nothing here is equal to even a fragment of this bliss. I was deluded like in deep sleep; how did this bliss remain?

I do not perceive any cause here; how can that be? Even though I endeavored for self-realization, till today, I did not know.

I see the self, another, and another; what can this be? Is it light or darkness, bliss or something else?

This self may be mine, and this form sequentially so. I do not reach the end conclusion here; I will ask my wise, dear one again.

Thus determining, the prince called the doorkeeper and instructed him to bring Hemalekha to his presence.

Then, she arrived in a moment by the doorkeeper's order and ascended the great mansion like moonlight on Mount Meru.

Then she saw the prince, her dear one, tranquil-minded, steady, unchanging, with senses withdrawn.

Approaching near, he quickly ascended her seat and she sat on the same seat in a moment.

Opening his eyes, he saw her standing by his side. Seeing his dear one, he quickly embraced her with affection.

Then his dear one spoke beautiful, nectar-flowing words, "My lord, why have you called me? Is your body healthy?"

Tell me the reason you called me, for which I have come. Thus asked by his dear one, he spoke to her about himself.

Dear, as instructed by you, I have settled here in solitude, deeply contemplating the nature and characteristics of the self.

Even further, it is strange that it is observed as separate, why is that? The self is always present and manifest.

Incorrect perception arises due to the cause of other perceptions. Considering this, I stopped other perceptions and became well-settled.

I saw darkness and another light, sometimes obtaining great bliss. What is this? Tell me, dear.

Is this indeed the form of the self, or may it be another? Properly discerning, tell me how I can observe it.

Thus addressed, Hemalekha, the knower of the ultimate, said: "Listen, dear, I will tell you all with a concentrated mind."

The effort you undertook in external suppression is auspicious, approved by all, especially by self-knowers.

Without that, no one has obtained it anywhere or anytime. But that does not become a cause due to being always obtained.

In non-attainment of self, selfhood cannot be; in selfhood, how can there be non-attainment? The self is unattainable in all ways; its attainment does not exist.

For the unattained, there may be attainment, but not for the self; therefore, its suppression is not for the purpose of attainment. Here, see an example.

Something covered by darkness is obtained due to its suppression by lamps, as if it were attained in the world, it is just like that.

Just as someone with a confused mind, having forgotten an ornament somewhere, by suppressing other thoughts, with concentration, again.

Obtains that lost ornament, just as it is attained. Suppression is not the cause here, but in the attainment of the ornament, as it is so.

In the attainment of the self, suppression of external objects is not the cause. The self has not been perceived by you still, there due to lack of comprehension.

Just as an unlearned person, going to the royal assembly at night, sees the courtiers and lamps, but does not know the illuminator.

Listen, dear, at the end of suppression, darkness is seen. At the beginning of seeing darkness, there your remaining state is established.

Contemplate that state always, giving supreme bliss. Here, all are seized by the great delusion of outward-seeing.

Searching and searching, obstructed, they did not attain that state. In the world, there are scholars, skilled and good logicians.

Not knowing that state, they grieve day and night. By mere word-craft, that state is not attained.

As long as a learned person searches or contemplates, it is not attained because it is not graspable.

Having gone far, it is not attainable, but by staying, it is always attained. It is not knowable by contemplation; it shines without contemplation.

Running like trying to catch one's shadow on the head, it is not attainable by action anywhere, just as in a clean mirror, thousands of reflections are seen.

Even a child sees but does not see the mirror; thus, indeed, a person sees the reflection of the world in the great mirror of the self.

One does not know the self due to lack of understanding, just as one familiar with the sky sees the sky but does not realize it.

The world does not realize the sky; similarly, it does not realize the nature of the self. Lord, with subtle vision, see the world as of the nature of knowledge and the known.

There, knowledge is self-established; in its absence, nothing exists. It is the measure of all means of knowledge and is self-established.

Since it is independent of means of knowledge, self-established from the beginning, therefore, it is not attained by the means of attainment, ever.

There, for the confused, there is no question nor answer. That great mirror is not to be denied.

There, all shines indeed like the reflection in a mirror. Limitation by space or even by time does not exist.

Due to shining within, how can there be limitation by them? The appearance of limitation is like objects in the sky.

Prince, with subtle vision, observe your own self where this world shines in the universal consciousness.

By the perfection of absorption in that, one attains all-doership. I will tell you the realization from which you attain that state.

Observe with subtle intellect the middle part between sleep and waking, between the states of consciousness, and between consciousness and the known.

This state is one's own form, which, upon attaining, one does not become deluded. The world continues like this by mere ignorance of this.

Here, there is no form, taste, smell, touch, or sound. There is no sorrow or happiness, nothing to be grasped and no grasper.

This is the lord of all, supporting all, in all forms yet devoid of all, the sustainer, Vishnu, Ishvara, and Sadashiva.

See, restraining slightly within the self by the self, giving up external expansion, striving for inner expansion.

Giving up the thought "I see," like a blind person with a steady mind, giving up seeing and not seeing, realize quickly who you are.

Thus spoken by his beloved, Hemachuda, realizing that state, attaining long rest, went forgetting the outward world.

Thus ends the ninth chapter named "Hemachuda's Rest" in the revered Knowledge Section of Tripura Rahasya.
