Chapter 3
Hearing the words spoken by Dattatreya, extremely curious, Jamadagni's son (Parashurama) asked again with humility.

O Lord, what has been spoken by you is true; without contemplation, great destruction has entirely been attained by people.

By contemplation, prosperity would be attained, and its cause is also heard. Hearing of greatness is indicated here, yet, there is a great doubt.

How can that also be obtained, and what would be the means? If it is natural, why has it not been heard by all?

Until today, I have not attained direction here. Sorrow obtained more by me, and I am defeated at every step.

The means have not been obtained from anywhere; kindly tell me this. Thus asked, Dattatreya, the ocean of compassion, spoke again, pleased.

Listen, O Rama, I will tell the supreme cause of prosperity. Association with the good is the supreme root, the removal of all sorrow.

In attaining the ultimate goal, the seed is said to be the association with the good. You also, by the association with the good Samvarta, the great soul.

Associated with him, you have attained this state, the rise of the fruit of prosperity. Indeed, the good, when associated, give supreme happiness.

Without association with the good, by whom has supreme prosperity been attained? In the world also, whatever association one attains, accordingly, the man becomes.

That fruit he attains in every way, there is no doubt. Here I will narrate to you; listen, O Rama, to this story.

Once, there was a king of Dasharna known as Muktachuda. His two sons were Hemachuda and Manichuda.

Both handsome and virtuous, skilled in all knowledge. Once, due to enthusiasm for hunting, surrounded by the army.

They entered the terrible forest of Sahya mountain, filled with lions, tigers, etc., very powerful and carrying bows and arrows.

Then there, they killed deer, lions, boars, buffaloes, and wolves with sharp arrows swiftly released from the bow.

Thus, while the princes were killing wild animals, a fierce wind appeared, showering gravel and stones.

The sky was covered with dust, becoming like night. There, neither rock, tree, nor person could be seen.

How could one see high from low, with the mountain covered in darkness? Struck by the shower of gravel, the army completely fled.

Some took shelter by trees, some by rocks, some by caves. Mounted on horses, the princes also fled far.

Hemachuda, somewhere there, reached a hermitage of ascetics, surrounded by groves of plantains and date palms, very beautiful.

There he saw an auspicious girl, like a flame, shining with a body glowing like heated gold.

Seeing her, the prince, smiling, asked, "Who are you, lotus-faced, in the forest?"

Residing as if fearless in this desolate, fear-inducing place, whose are you, and by whom do you live here alone? How?

Questioned thus, the blameless girl spoke to the prince, "Welcome, prince, please take a seat."

This is the duty of ascetics, indeed, to worship a guest. I see you are tired and distressed by the fierce wind.

Thus, while the princes were killing wild animals, a fierce wind appeared, showering gravel and stones.

Tying the horse to a date palm tree, sitting there, relieved of fatigue, he thus told, "You deserve to hear my story."

She made him eat fruits and drink juice. Thus, the blameless girl made the prince obtain rest.

She spoke with a sweet, honey-flowing voice, "Prince, Vyaghrapada is the sage, a follower of Shiva."

By whom the most virtuous worlds were conquered by the strength of his penance, knower of the highest and lowest, indeed, always worshipped by the leaders of sages.

I am rightfully his daughter, known as Hemalekha, born of the virtuous Vidyutprabha, one who is enchanting in all parts.

Once, along the Vena river, she came to bathe. Then, consequently, Sushena, the king of Vanga, came there.

He saw her, the world beauty, bathing in the river, her pair of breasts clearly visible through the wet cloth.

Struck by love's arrow, he desired her there, then she, enchanted by beauty, accepted his words.

Uniting with her, the king then went towards his city. She, the virtuous one, also bore a pregnancy from the rajarishi’s strength.

Afraid of offending her husband, she abandoned the pregnancy and came here. Born of the rajarishi’s unfailing strength, I am the girl, then.

Vyaghrapada saw me, who came for evening worship, with compassion, taking me up and protecting me like a mother.

By duty, he who is called a protector, indeed like a father, he. I am his rightful daughter, devoted to serving the father.

By his greatness, I have no fear here or indeed anywhere. This place is never invaded by gods, demons, or evil minds.

To enter the hermitage you may be worthy, but entering, one may attain no fear. This is my story stated. Stay a little, prince.

The venerable father will come, behold him. Bowing to him, having received his wishes, then in the morning, you may leave.

Then, noticing the prince under the control of desire, the wise girl spoke again, "Prince, take composure."

"Father is coming soon; then seek what you desire." While she was speaking, the great sage Vyaghrapada arrived.

He arrived from the forest, gathering leaves, flowers, etc. Seeing the sage arriving, the prince stood up.

Bowing and announcing his name, he sat down as instructed. Then, seeing the prince with a distorted appearance due to desire,

Knowing everything with yogic vision and considering it appropriate, the sage gave Hemalekha to him for marriage.

The pleased prince, taking her, went to the city. Muktachuda, very pleased, celebrated with great festivity.

The king performed his marriage according to the rules. Then the prince was also always engaged in play with her.

In palaces, forests, and riverbanks, the prince spent time with Hemalekha, who was not very desirous of enjoyments.

Seeing her always indifferent, he asked in private, "Dear, why are you not affectionate towards me, who is affectionate to you?"

"Dear with a pure smile, why are you not extremely attached to enjoyments? Are the enjoyments not appealing to you here? Why is this?"

"In excellent enjoyments, you seem not to be attached to me. Lacking attachment in you, how can my love be pleasing?"

"Though I am attached to you, you appear with your mind elsewhere. Even when I speak repeatedly, you do not seem to hear anything."

"Even after a long time, when I arrive, embracing your neck, you ask, 'When did you come, lord?' as if unaware."

"In pleasing, rare enjoyments, your mind is not attached at all. Why do you not approve of anything?"

"Indeed, when I approach and see you without me, with closed eyes, I envision you staying there."

"Indifferent to enjoyments and objects, how would my happiness be, like one associated with a wooden doll?"

"Not abandoning your wish, my intention means nothing. I entirely follow you like the lotus follows the moonlight, indeed."

"Thus, tell where your mind is, dearer than life. By which my mind would be purified, you are requested, dear."

Thus ends the third chapter on the Greatness of Association with the Good in the Knowledge Section of the revered Tripura Rahasya.
