Chapter 17
Having heard thus from Janaka, Ashtavakra again asked the king. What he asked, I will tell you. Listen attentively, O descendant of Bhrigu.

O king, you said that even in states of activity, there are subtle absorptions. Thus, tell me that clearly.

In which states are those absorptions of non-conceptual consciousness? Thus asked by him, the great king then said.

Listen, O sage, I will explain the absorptions in activities. When first embraced by the beloved, newly.

Then, the man does not know the external or internal for a moment. He remains not overpowered by sleep. That is called absorption.

When something long desired, determined as unattainable, is suddenly attained, O sage.

Then, the man does not know the external or internal for a moment. He remains not overpowered by sleep. That is called absorption.

Unexpectedly going somewhere, fearless with a delighted mind, if suddenly sees a tiger, etc., like death.

Then, the man does not know the external or internal for a moment. He remains not overpowered by sleep. That is called absorption.

When very dear, one's own son, etc., the lord in household duties, suddenly hears as dead, indeed.

Then, the man does not know the external or internal for a moment. He remains not overpowered by sleep. That is called absorption.

Now, I will also tell otherwise the origin of absorption. Listen, there are absorptions in between waking, dreaming, and deep sleep.

Seeing something at a distance with a one-pointed intellect, O sage, the mind goes into an elongated state like a leech on the blades of grass.

In the body, consisting of the appearance of the body, and in the state of feeling, likewise, in between, observe the mind always in the state called non-conceptual.

What is the use of many words here? Listen, O subtle examiner, in activities, the knowledge of anyone does not shine as one.

This activity consists of fragmented knowledge and groups. Therefore, all philosophers indeed describe it as such.

The self or intellect, divided by moments, stands in the state of non-conceptuality in the stream of those moments.

O son of Kahola, know that for the knowers, there is absorption every moment. For another, absorption is like the horn of a rabbit.

Having heard thus said by Janaka, the sage again asked, "O king, is absorption non-conceptual in activity?"

If that is for everyone, how would there be transmigration? In deep sleep and perception, appearing inert and indistinct.

The accomplishment of human goals is indeed through non-conceptual absorption, where the pure consciousness shines as the self. How then can there be transmigration again?

This knowledge is indeed the destroyer of the family of ignorance, called non-conceptual absorption, which is the cause of the highest good.

"O king, tell me this, the destroyer of all doubts," thus asked, the king said to the sage.

Listen, O sage, I will tell you this supreme secret. From ignorance, this transmigration has arisen from beginningless time.

The appearances of pleasure and pain are established by the nature of flow, like a dream, continuously experienced by all, always.

The cessation of that is understood to be from knowledge alone. That knowledge may be conceptual, which removes ignorance.

Ignorance is not removed by non-conceptual knowledge alone. Non-conceptual knowledge is not opposed by anyone.

Together, non-conceptual knowledge, supported by conceptual, is well-established like a wall for varied appearances.

Non-conceptual knowledge alone is called knowledge. Indeed, due to the mentioning of concepts, it becomes conceptual.

Ignorance, known as conceptual knowledge, is indeed not otherwise. That is established as various kinds of cause and effect.

The cause is declared to be known as the fullness of one's own self. The conscious self may indeed be complete due to the absence of limitation.

The adept is indeed of the absence of limitation of parts and so forth. The knowledge of such a self is established as incompleteness.

Here now, in the form of 'I am', that root ignorance may indeed be. The appearance of body-self and so forth is in the form of a sprout of that.

The cessation of ignorance does not lead to the end of transmigration. Indeed, ignorance does not cease without complete self-knowledge.

That complete self-knowledge is well-established as of two kinds: indirect and direct. The indirect comes from teacher and scripture.

It is established that direct knowledge is not the cause of human goals. Your knowledge may be as arising from scripture and hearing.

Knowledge obtained merely by faith is not said to yield fruit. Direct knowledge indeed arises from the maturation of absorption.

Absorption, not obstructed by ignorance with elaboration, certainly yields auspicious fruit. Absorption preceded by knowledge indeed produces knowledge.

Therefore, no benefit arises in absorption for the ignorant, just as seeing an unknown ruby in a box.

Just as another person, having seen a gem known by hearing somewhere, immediately recognizes it.

Even if one is very skilled, if not devoted, one may see a gem somewhere again and again without recognizing it, O sage.

Similarly, deluded ones do not find the fruit based on knowledge. Even the learned, if ignorant, do not recognize it.

Due to not being devoted, they do not recognize at all, just as one does not recognize a star even when seeing it.

The deluded, devoid of heard knowledge, even if endowed with it, indeed, do not recognize even if they see, due to the absence of devotion.

One who, having heard about the Venus star by the characteristics of direction and form, determines that it should be known by them in every way, is a wise man devoted to that.

With a focused mind, one will recognize it clearly. Thus, due to ignorance and lack of devotion, the deluded ones do not recognize it.

They do not recognize their own self in the presence of absorptions, O sage, wandering for alms due to bad luck, just as one who has forgotten his treasure.

Therefore, all these states of absorptions are purposeless. Indeed, for children, the non-conceptual state is always present.

No fruit is yielded from the non-removal of ignorance, O sage. Knowledge, which is based on recognition, may be conceptual.

That indeed removes the ignorance, the root of transmigration. Pleased by acts in many births, the self-deity becomes satisfied.

Then the desire for liberation arises, it does not arise otherwise, even in millions of ages. Awareness in births is supremely rare.

Very rare among them, indeed, is human birth in every way. Even there, subtle intellect is extremely rare.

See, O sage, among the immobile beings, even a hundredth part is considered. Indeed, among them, the mobile beings are not seen as even a hundredth part.

There is no equal humanity, even there, consider. Millions of humans are seen like animals.

Those who do not know good and bad, virtue or sin, others also, millions of mortals, are engaged and engrossed in desires.

Delighting in the coming and going, proud of the semblance of wisdom, among such people, but some are wise ones.

With minds full of impurity, they also are disbelievers in the non-dual state. Covered by the divine illusion, they do not perceive the non-dual supreme state.

How can that state be attained by all, by those blinded by illusion, by the unfortunate? Indeed, the intellect of those blinded by illusion does not ascend to that state.

Others, with bad fortune, even if intellectually advanced, here, who with false notions, again are denied by wrong imaginations.

Alas, the divine illusion, even seeing the great state, the wish-fulfilling gem in hand, they abandon indeed by wrong imaginations.

Those whose self-deity is pleased by worship, they are liberated from illusion, endowed with good reasoning and faith.

Established in non-duality, they attain the supreme state. I will explain the sequence to you, O sage, listen attentively.

Devotion to the deity is obtained by the merits of countless births. Worshipping for a long time, by that grace, thereafter.

Attains disinterest in the objects of enjoyment and devotion to that, through dispassion and devotion, and associated with faith.

Having attained the true guru, by his instruction, one knows non-duality, the supreme state. This knowledge is indeed indirect, for non-duality exists thus here.

Then, properly contemplate non-duality, the self-deity, by establishing with sound reasoning and dispelling doubts.

Then, having firmly established the principle of the self, non-dual, with respect, meditate directly with determination and effort.

Then, making the supreme state the object of meditation, destroys ignorance, the root of transmigration, no doubt about it.

In mature meditation, in non-dual samadhi, called the supreme state, having attained, then recalling, becomes recognizing.

He, the non-dual self, thinking "I am," directly destroys the root of transmigration, ignorance, with parts, quickly.

The maturity of meditation is indeed the renunciation of thoughts; thought is various perceptions, but in one way, non-dual.

By not even mentioning others, thought is renounced; when thought is renounced, thereafter non-dual is naturally established.

As in the painting, when cleansed, the pure wall remains, indeed the making of the pure wall is cleaning the painting, indeed.

Thus, by the removal of thought, the mind is naturally non-dual; non-dual self-attainment is indeed the renunciation of thought.

There is no higher state to be attained than this pure state; even wise ones are deluded here by the power of illusion.

The wise perceive this state in a moment, indeed; O sage, there are three  types of qualified ones: highest, lowest, and middle.

The highest understand that state at the first instruction; contemplation and meditation also happen at the same time as hearing.

For the highest, indeed, there is no effort in attaining that state; once, in the summer night adorned with moonlight.

Embraced by the beloved, seated in a blooming garden on a luxurious bed, intoxicated by wine.

I heard in the sky the sweet words of a group of siddhas, referring to the principle of non-duality, and realized that state at that time.

Realized through contemplation and meditation at that very moment; thus, in half a moment, having realized that pure state.

For a moment, I became more with a concentrated mind, completely immersed in the ocean of supreme bliss.

Then, having attained memory, I became engrossed in contemplation; oh, this wonderful state is indeed filled with bliss and nectar.

Having attained this unprecedented state again, I enter it; not even a fraction of the happiness of Indra and others would be sufficient in that state.

The happiness of this state, even in a fraction, is not comparable up to Brahma; until today, indeed, I have wasted this time.

Without knowing one's own treasure adorned with wish-fulfilling gems, one wanders for alms, indeed, seeking flour in a fist.

Alas, people, deluded by ignorance of their own self-bliss, attain external happiness, only a fraction, with great effort.

Enough of this vain effort for external happiness; I would indeed always be devoted to the infinite bliss.

Enough of this external activity for me; like grinding flour and reproof, indeed.

Those foods, those indeed, garlands, and beds, varied ornaments, and pleasures with women.

Mostly long stale, yet enjoyed again, following others, my disgust indeed does not arise.

Thus deciding, as much as I turned inward again, then another auspicious contemplation approached me.

Oh, this delusion of mind, why has it approached me? Even being blissfully complete self, I am indeed always established.

What do I wish to do again? What is there to be obtained by me? What have I not obtained, where, when, or how is it attained?

How could the achievement of the unachieved be true? Oh, how could there be action in my form of infinite consciousness and bliss?

The body, senses, and inner faculties are indeed like a dream; all these are indeed mine, of the indivisible one consciousness-self.

What would happen if one inner faculty is restrained? Even if others are unrestrained, they are indeed my minds.

Thus, if one mind is restrained, what would happen to me? Restrained and unrestrained minds completely shine in me.

In the restraint of all minds, there is no restraint for me; from the vast and extensive space, where is the restraint in me?

Thus, how could absorption (samadhi) be in me, filled with complete consciousness-bliss, more complete than the sky?

How could there be any action for me, by which good and bad even exist, in the infinite body-self appearances due to my greatness?

What is the use of the appearance or absence of action for me? There is not even the least to be done or not to be done by me.

Therefore, what would be in restraint for me, full of bliss, whether in absorption or not, of true complete nature?

In whichever action this body is established, let it remain there itself; thus, I am serene in every way, an abode of great bliss.

Of unending radiance form, I am completely full and stainless; thus, this is my declared state of the highest.

For the inferior, the fruit born of knowledge comes after many births; for the middle, it comes gradually through hearing and contemplation.

Meditation becomes, then knowledge arises; absorption joined with the fruit of realization becomes rare.

What is the use of hundreds of absorptions without the fruit of realization? Therefore, devoid of realization, there is no fruit by those absorptions.

Even going in the world, in the paths illuminated by non-dual awareness, not knowing the objects, their ignorance does not end.

Realization known as non-dual, pure knowledge, own form, that always shines, indeed, even if not perceived.

By the covering of conceptions, indeed, in the removal of conceptions, the shining appears more, unprecedentedly.

By the non-difference of knowledge and the known, the unknown is said to be known; thus, this becomes the highest order of self-realization.

O Brahmin, thus heard, contemplating again, you should know; then, knowing the self-principle, you will become accomplished.

Thus instructed by Janaka, the great sage Aṣṭāvakra, honored and permitted, respectfully returned to his own place.

Through contemplation and meditation, realizing the supreme state, removing all doubts, he quickly became liberated while living.

Thus ends the seventeenth chapter named "Ashtavakra" in the revered Knowledge Section of Tripura Rahasya.
