Chapter 22
Having heard the story of the Rakshasa, Rama, the scion of Bhrigu's clan, with humility, asked the lord of the avadhutas again.

O Lord, what was asked by the curse-freed Brahmin, and what did Hemangada say? Kindly tell this to me.

I am greatly curious about this, and it is not a small matter. Thus asked again, compassionate Dattatreya said.

O Rama, I will tell you that which was spoken with great meaning. Then Vasuman asked Hemangada, who was present.

O prince, I ask you something, you answer. I learned that at first from the yogi Ashtaka.

Again, by your words, the supreme state is completely known. But how is the state of the knower of truth?

How can the state of the well-known, of the knower, be dedicated to actions, be like the state of darkness and light together?

O prince, tell this to me correctly as it is. Thus asked, Hemangada said to him, the best of Brahmins.

O Brahmin, your delusion is even now not completely destroyed. By actions, how is knowledge, which is self-existent, obstructed?

If knowledge is obstructed by actions, then how is the gain of human goals possible by sleep-like knowledge?

All actions, even this, may rely on knowledge. How is that knowledge obstructed by that? Explain this to me.

Knowledge is indeed where this world shines. By resolve, all actions indeed shine in knowledge.

Without resolve, observing that form by intellect once, one becomes accomplished, free from bondage. Thus, it is well-determined.

Therefore, O Brahmin, your question is not approved by the wise. Again, Vasuman said to the prince, "O great one."

Truth, O prince, this is also well-determined by me. True nature is indeed awareness without thoughts, as it is said here.

With thoughts, having attained, where is not delusion again? Indeed, thoughts are delusion, like a snake in the rope.

Listen, O Brahmin, you do not know the distinction between delusion and non-delusion. The sky appears blue even to those who know.

They sometimes act saying the sky is blue. But by that knowledge, it is not called delusion.

To the ignorant, however, that is delusion; to the knower of truth, that is indeed true knowledge. That knowledge is like a dead great snake without authority or living.

The action of the reflection in the mirror may be the same for the knowledgeable and the ignorant. But therefore, there is a difference between them.

For the wise, that knowledge is indeed true knowledge; but for the ignorant, it is delusion. For the wise, knowledge is indeed worldly transactions in all aspects.

By seeing the worldly transactions, as mirror reflections, they are equal for the knowledgeable. Therefore, again, there is no arising of delusion.

That born of ignorance is only removed by knowledge. Why does the fault-born ignorance dissolve by mere knowledge?

Therefore, indeed, the one with defective sight sees duality even when knowing. This world appearance arises from the fault of action.

Therefore, worldly transactions do not dissolve into non-action. When action is completed, non-dual consciousness remains.

Therefore, there is no occurrence of delusion for the wise. Thus, hearing this, the Brahmin again asked the prince.

O prince, how may action arise for the wise? Even in contact with the fire of knowledge, how does action as cotton remain?

Then Hemangada, the prince, said to the Brahmin, "O Brahmin, listen, I will explain the threefold action of the wise."

For all, the actions may be unripe and ripe. Destroyed and arisen, thus there, all are destroyed by knowledge, which is superior.

The cook of actions is time, which is determined and fixed. By time, those that are mostly cooked are mentioned as ripened action.

Uncooked, unripe action may be after the arising of knowledge. Know that these are done, destroyed, by arising of knowledge, arisen from the destruction (of ignorance).

There, indeed, the ripe action that is commenced, thus it is said, stands with force like a released arrow, bearing fruit.

Rooted in that, the world appearance by precedence of knowledge, is established, even like delusion, but not delusion due to a difference in result.

It generates immediate fruit, clear to those with intoxicated knowledge, and unclear to the middling. That fruit appearance is clear for the wise.

For the highest, indeed, the immediate fruit has a clear appearance. O Brahmin, that fruit is not said to be, like the horn of a hare.

For the ignorant, the fruit of action is nourished based on the past. From past and future connection, that fruit is nourished by them.

For the wise, the connection with fruit is cut off, once connected to the self. Therefore, the fruit generated by action is not nourished for the intoxicated.

For the middling wise, that fruit is like the pain caused by a mosquito in light sleep, attaining subtlety.

For the highest wise, that fruit, even if complete, is like a burnt rope, due to the glory of established self-knowledge.

As in the course of a play, a man taking different costumes, rejoicing and lamenting again, does not attain internal change.

Thus, this one stable in knowledge, full of results, is not touched by fruits. Therefore, those fruits are like the horn of a hare.

But by the ignorant, the pure self is not perceived. Therefore, they consider the body as the self, discerning the visible as true.

By the intoxicated in knowledge, the self is known as pure consciousness. The world is seen as unreal, but even thus, due to weak practice...

Taken from previous impressions, their knowledge, considering the body as self, in between, come to the appearance of the world's reality.

Again, by the impression of knowledge, they shake off the unreal perception. Thus, mutually, the impressions of true and false knowledge...

Combined, of the intoxicated in knowledge, thus, in between, the fruit is clear. Even if the opposing impressions are equal, these are not equal, O best of sages.

By the impression of true knowledge, the other impression is obstructed. And by the impression of false knowledge, the true impression is not obstructed.

Occupied by the impression of false knowledge, one has forgotten the supreme only. Then deciding that false impression as of delusion...

Shaking off the false impression, one attains the true. Then the true impression is not obstructed ever, O best of Brahmins.

For the middling, forgetfulness is not there, nor false knowledge. For the non-forgetter, by desire, the false knowledge sometimes may arise.

This state of the accomplished is said of the aspirant, it is said, listen: as much as one is focused on that, so non-forgetfulness is elevated.

For the complete accomplished one, forgetfulness of that is not; false knowledge is removed by effort. For the highest, again, O Brahmin, either in samadhi and worldly transactions...

There is not even a little difference where non-forgetfulness (of that state) is always. For the middling, who is focused on samadhi, his non-forgetfulness is established.

It may be slightly faded and may be situated in the ground of false knowledge, O best of sages. Even the highest, due to free will or by destiny...

Even focused on samadhi, his forgetfulness may arise if negligent indeed. Actually, listen, O best of sages, about the middling and the highest of the wise.

There is indeed no action at all because they have attained completeness. Beyond the self of consciousness, they see nothing.

How can any residue of action remain, because all is turned to ashes by the fire of consciousness? Therefore, nothing remains of theirs.

Like a magic show, the actions are seen only by others. Listen, O Brahmin, I will briefly explain the secret to you.

The vision of the wise is said to be like that of Shiva. There is not even the slightest difference; this is the truth without a doubt.

Therefore, no action follows the wise. Thus, hearing this, Vasuman, as explained by Hemangada...

Free from all doubts, with a clear mind of knowledge, honored by princes and others, he returned to his place.

Having reached their city, the two princes also then lived further, thus hearing, Rama again asked the sage, Atri's son.

This knowledge indeed heard, O guru, emanating from your mouth, has destroyed my doubt and made known that great state.

The self, pervaded by consciousness, shines everywhere. Even so, all was said by you from the beginning.

Briefly, again, tell the most essential knowledge, as long as it is to be retained by me, O guru, with all my heart.

Thus asked by Rama, again, Atri's son said, "Listen, O Rama, I will explain the most essential again."

Which consciousness, the supreme goddess, complete, filled with the sense of 'I', that supreme, always known as the māyā power, from her greatness...

The world indeed manifests from the unique creator. Like a reflection in a mirror, listen to that method in order.

That supreme consciousness, complete, expanded with the complete sense of 'I', by the power of freedom, shines in its own form in two ways.

There, even in one part, when the sense of 'I' is manifested incompletely, then the second part is separated from that sense of 'I'.

That view became the external unmanifest, indeed, O descendant of Bhrigu. But the one associated with incomplete sense of 'I', this is said to be Sadashiva.

He, seeing that unmanifest part as different  even from himself, "I am this," thus always knowing by intent on contemplating with non-difference.

He indeed, again, by freedom, desiring to create the various worlds, occupied the unmanifest body of the self as "I".

Thus, so intent on contemplating, the lord manifested. Occupied the unmanifest identification, indeed the lord.

He became threefold, in the forms of Rudra, Hari, and Brahma, manifesting the vast aggregation of the seer and the seen.

Various forms became established in those forms. Many forms of Hari also became intent on destruction.

Numerous forms of Rudra thus became. This world order, thus, the world essence, is like the reflection in a mirror.

It shines only, O Rama, not anything born/appears. The supreme consciousness, indeed always in the form of complete 'I'.

Established, also numerous, enveloped in the complete sense of 'I'. As you, O Rama, filled with the sense of 'I' in all bodies.

Different eyes and other senses of 'I', also engaged in various actions. Thus indeed, the supreme consciousness rests in the complete 'I', everywhere.

From Sadashiva onwards to a blade of grass, even resting in the incomplete sense of 'I', truly, she indeed is the supreme consciousness, shining thus.

The form of bodily 'I', you, by yourself, are incapable of grasping form, taste, etc., but it is by attaining identity with consciousness.

You grasp everything always, thus, O lord Sadashiva, by yourself, full of non-difference with everything, from Brahma to a blade of grass.

Attaining identity within, he knows and does. Just as your form, indeed, is without difference, the basis of all being.

But also, does not know or do anything, O descendant of Bhrigu, thus indeed, the supreme consciousness is the basis of all worlds.

Not knowing or doing even the slightest difference anywhere, thus, all the world shines in her indeed.

By her freedom, manifested and like a mirror reflection, the shining of the world, all, indeed, is her reflection.

Like a mirror reflection, indeed, here you, I, and others, the seers, are indeed consisting of reflection.

In the meeting of the seen objects, pure consciousness is indeed, otherwise not affected. Like the non-connection of the mirror, with pots and others.

Just as pure mirror, may be the mere distinction is of reflections. Thus, in erasing the appearance of the seen arising from imagination...

Remaining as supreme consciousness with a non-dual nature, full of great bliss, and from the absence of the slightest sorrow.

Because it is the form of all condensed bliss and is desired by all, happiness may be the self-nature, because it is desired by all.

For the sake of which bodily existence, which is not desired by anyone, a trace of whose existence is indeed called pleasure from objects.

That (supreme consciousness) indeed shines in the loss of burden and in deep sleep. Consciousness indeed is called bliss from desirability.

The deluded do not know the self-nature of great bliss. They perceive differences by the difference of expressions.

As indeed, objects appearing in the mirror, their cause, as long as the knowledge of the mirror is there, it indeed shines as different.

When known as reflection, though appearing as before, is not considered different from the mirror, the mirror is indeed pure.

Thus, to the one who knows the truth, the world appears like this, everything is only the self, indeed, not otherwise.

As pots and others in clay, just as ornaments in gold, and images in stone, thus the world is in the self of consciousness.

The vision that the world does not exist indeed is incomplete, O descendant of Bhrigu. The determination, indeed, the opposite of it does not exist, does not accomplish too.

From the perception of the aspirant, the world clearly arising again, how can the world be dissolved by mere curse, saying it does not exist?

All is like a city of reflections, existing by the nature of a mirror. Thus, the world is declared to be one form with the consciousness-self, the truth.

This may be complete knowledge by eliminating contraction. This seer itself, attained seen (seeing seer-seen separately), by the greatness of its own glory.

As the mirror has the reflection of a city, this is the essence of scripture. There is no bondage, no liberation, no aspirant, and no means.

The unbroken non-dual consciousness power, Tripura, indeed, shining, she indeed is ignorance and knowledge, bondage and liberation, and the means.

This much indeed is to be known; nothing else exists, O descendant of Bhrigu. This has been told to you, O Rama, the process of knowledge from the beginning.

Knowing this well, a person further does not grieve anywhere. O Narada, this piece of knowledge is obtained by proper reasoning.

Heard, if it does not destroy whose delusion arising from ignorance. Even after hearing this, whose delusion exists, he may not attain peace anywhere.

That mountain-like man in the world, by this knowledge, how can he be born again? Once heard indeed, this knowledge may become firm.

In two or three ways, for the dull, knowledge may not be generated. This destroyer of the flood of sins, heard, is considered the giver of knowledge.

Written words, these are destroyer of fault perception, revered, purifier of the mind, destroyer of delusion, this should always be practiced.

Whose form is all-soul-prevading, clearly understood by consideration, liberation is attained. Otherwise, it may be bondage. She indeed is Tripura, hrim.

Thus ends the twenty-second chapter named "The Compilation of Adventures" in the esteemed Tripura Rahasya.
